<!-- Experimental attempt at combining INTRO_EARLY_DAYS with WHAT_IS_THIS.-->

What is now the Humanities Computing and Media Centre at the University of Victoria was once simply the Language Centre, a unit whose role was to maintain language laboratories and computer workstations and to write software applications used for language teaching courses. We had both Macintosh and Windows workstations, and would typically write custom software for one or other platform but not both, since writing cross-platform software applications was quite difficult in the days before the WWW and Java. When the Web first appeared, we seized on it enthusiastically as a practical way to provide language-teaching resources which could be delivered not only on both kinds of workstation in our labs but also to other locations. When JavaScript emerged around 1996, we were blessed with the capability to create truly interactive programmed teaching exercises, and by the turn of the millenium we had built language-teaching exercise collections for many languages, as well as desktop authoring tools to make the creation of such pages easy for non-coders (Arneil & Holmes 1998, 1999 and 2001).

In the early 2000s, the Language Centre was transformed into the Humanities Computing and Media Centre (HCMC), and given a wider mandate to support what was then commonly termed Humanities Computing, now Digital Humanities. Better-funded projects came along, and more ambitious coding was undertaken, supporting not only language-teaching resources but also digital edition projects, historical datasets, mapping initiatives, and many other research and teaching activities. With the advent of new technologies and increased financial support, we were now able to create more sophisticated web applications and blessed with our own server, thanks to the ground-breaking Canadian TaPOR (Text-Analysis Portal) initiative, we were no longer constrained by static (albeit interactive) websites. Instead, we could create resources that could dynamically display, render, and deploy material in myriad contexts, decorated by server-side processing that could adapt to the needs of the user or the application context. Sophisticated searching, grouping, and presentation options that formerly posed significant challenges were now easy to implement. Beginning in 2003 we generated a large number of these projects, many of which continue to be well-known within the Digital Humanities, and continued to accrue new ones throughout the 2010s; our servers were well-populated and their CPUs were busy running XQuery, XSLT, PHP, SQL, and even ASP code.

And as our project portfolio burgeoned, so did our maintenance burden. The server-side technologies that solved our earlier problems began to pose new ones: they required frequent maintenance and updates that often forced projects, while ostensibly finished or on hiatus, to be re-written completely. As an example, the Robert Graves Diary (https://graves.uvic.ca/), one of our earliest digital edition projects, was originally written based on eXist version 0.9 in 2003-2004; it had to be steadily revised throughout 2005-2007, and then completely rewritten for eXist 1.4 in 2012, because the original Tomcat/Cocoon/eXist 0.9 stack became obsolete. Then in 2014 it was updated again. This was a project on which the core academic work had been completed in the first phase of the project, but due to infrastructure churn it regularly returned to haunt us. Over the years, we amassed a maintenance burden which threatened to overwhelm our ability to support new projects coming through our doors.

This problem was the impetus for Project Endings, which brought together a team consisting of academic digital humanists, programmers, and librarians, along with a selection of active, complex digital edition projects to determine how best to plan, execute, and archive our projects so that they could live on indefinitely without further maintenance. The Web had solved for us the challenge to "write once, run anywhere" (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Write_once,_run_anywhere); the question we were now asking was how can we "write once, run forever"? And, as we discovered, we already had the answer: while we were busy with the dynamic, database-backed projects built on MySQL and eXist that demanded constant upkeep, the static projects we built in the 1990s using the rudimentary set of HTML and JavaScript available at the time continued to work with virtually no maintenance at all. Indeed, the materials created during this period still exist and they still work perfectly. Examples can be seen in the Indonesian course materials created in 1999 (https://web.uvic.ca/hrd/indonesian/) and the endearingly-dated-looking "Web Language" online presentation (Holmes 1997), originally created in 1997 and last updated in 1999. The latter includes a feedback form which is still regularly used, so it still clearly has some relevance despite its appearance. The HTML and JavaScript is still fully functional, although non-standards-based cutting-edge technologies of the time, such as RealAudio, of course no longer work.

This paper thus presents what we term the "Endings Principles": a set of approaches for creating archivable, sustainable, and maintainable digital humanities web applications. At its core, the Endings principles revolve around the creation of static websites comprised solely of HTML, CSS, and JS. There are five core principles each with a set of corrolaries and explanations that span the lifecycle of a digital project from its beginning (Data; Documentation), to its implementation (Processing; Products), and to its inevitable end (Release). For each, we chronicle the various failures that forced us to recognize the fragility of our own practices and outline the steps we took to correct and strengthen our sites in response. Drawing from our own projects (from the core Endings set and beyond), we offer examples of how implemented each principle in practice to demonstrate both the feasibility and major affordances of adopting a ruthlessly pragmatic view of a project's stability. At times, the principles may feel like a step in the wrong direction, a retrograde return to old-fashioned structures and constraints that have long been usurped by server-side infrastructures; yet, as we suggest, these principles— 

