## 5. Endings Principles, or: from Tamagotchis to Pet Rocks

Readers of a certain age will surely remember the 1990s craze for the Tamagotchi, an electronic device that was designed to mimic a pet animal, by requiring regular attention—feeding, education, play—from its owner in order to keep it healthy. Our digital edition projects had become rather like Tamagotchis in requiring constant tending simply to keep them functional. Slightly older readers, however, may remember a similar, pre-digital fad from the 1980s. The Pet Rock was exactly what it purported to be: a piece of rock, which required nothing whatsoever from its owner. “A rock would not need to be fed, walked, bathed, or groomed, and it would not die, become sick, or be disobedient” ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pet_Rock)). Our Endings mission is to devise methods for turning our Tamagotchis into Pet Rocks. 

The Endings Principles present a set of simple guidelines for this process, and are intended for two audiences: researchers who have Tamagotchi projects that are already too needy, and who are looking for an exit strategy; and (more importantly) researchers in the early stages of planning and setting up new projects, who are in a position to build a sustainable, low-maintenance digital edition from the outset.

This article lays out and discusses version 2.0 of the Endings Principles. This version does not differ substantially from the initial draft, first published on the Endings website in 2018, but the major sections have been re-ordered. Those sections cover the five principal aspects of a digital edition project which we consider to be crucial in designing for longevity: Data, Documentation, Processing, Products, and the Release Model.