
### 5.2 Documentation 

Within the digital humanities (and of course other fields), the literature of best practices is suffused with exhortations to document more, document better, and document everything. The reality for grant-funded projects, however, is that documentation is frequently the last task on the agenda and therefore likely to be curtailed or neglected when funding runs out or deadlines approach (Morgan 2021). The Endings survey found that “60% [of projects] claimed to have a clearly documented data model, but 90% of those that had documentation considered it to be partial or inadequate, so it appears that a project’s data model is well documented in only about 50% of cases” (Arneil, Holmes and Newton 2019). We are no different in our exhortations to document thoroughly, but we do take a strong position with regard to the availability of documentation. 

#### 5.2.1 Data models, including field names, descriptions, and controlled values, should be clearly documented in a static document that is maintained with the data, and should also form part of the products.  

In most of our larger projects, such as _The Map of Early Modern London_, training for research assistants and other contributors forms a core part of the project's mission, and we have learned to build this kind of praxis documentation directly into, and publish along with, the digital edition itself. This has two significant advantages to keeping documentation segregated and private. First, documentation that travels with the published product increases the likelihood that future researchers will be able to make sense of our materials and adopt or repurpose them easily. Second, the visibility of our documentation helps to keep us honest. Documentation is less prone to be aspirational and more likely to reflect the reality of our praxis if users of our editions can read it alongside the editions themselves, and point out any failures or discrepancies.

#### 5.2.2 All rights and intellectual property issues should be clearly documented. Where possible the Data and Products should be released under open licenses (Creative Commons, GNU, BSD, MPL). 

As suggested above, a project's best chance of long-term survival lies in making it as amenable as possible to copying and repurposing. While this article is mainly concerned with overcoming the technical barriers to digital longevity, it must also be noted that any materials or data accompanied by any sort of restrictive covenant or license will inevitably be less appealing to a future researcher considering making use of it. In the same way, the LOCKSS preservation strategy requires the collaboration of multiple institutions willing to host project products over the long term, and this is much less likely to happen if licensing issues make it more difficult to deliver the materials to the institution's end-users in a convenient way. Therefore we strongly recommend that projects, where possible, make all their materials available under generous Creative Commons licenses, open-source all their code, and avoid depending on any proprietary data, programming, libraries, or other resources. For example, it is far better to try to acquire your own copy of a historical text and scan the pages yourself than to build a digital edition around page-images supplied under license by a corporation or other rights-holder who may restrict access to them.<!--I think we need a note somewhere here that acknowledges that there are many good reasons / rationales for restricting data--privacy, cultural protocols, legal issues, etc-->

Even worse than restrictive licensing is lack of clarity about license terms. If an institution or a researcher cannot discover the terms under which content has been released, they will never be able to determine whether they can or should archive or make use of it.

